6. Apache Kafka
Similar to Apache Spark, Apache Kafka is an open-source event streaming platform with multiple applications such as data synchronization, messaging, real-time data streaming, and more. Apache Kafka is popular for building ELT pipelines and is widely used as a data collection and ingestion tool.

A simple, reliable, scalable, and high-performance tool, Apache Kafka can stream large amounts of data into a target quickly.

7. Amazon Redshift
In a modern data infrastructure, data warehouses have evolved beyond data storage roles. Amazon Redshift is an excellent example–it is a fully-managed cloud-based data warehouse designed for large-scale data storage and analysis.

Redshift makes it easy to query and combine huge amounts of structured and semi-structured data across data warehouses, operational databases, and data lakes using standard SQL. It also allows data engineers to easily integrate new data sources within hours, which reduces time to insight.

8. Snowflake
Snowflake is a popular cloud-based data warehousing platform that offers businesses separate storage and compute options, support for third-party tools, data cloning, and much more. Snowflake helps streamline data engineering activities by easily ingesting, transforming, and delivering data for deeper insights.

With Snowflake, data engineers do not have to worry about managing infrastructure, concurrency handling, etc., and can focus on other valuable activities for delivering your data.

9. Amazon Athena
Amazon Athena is an interactive query tool that helps you analyze unstructured, semi-structured, and structured data stored in Amazon S3 (Amazon Simple Storage Service). You can use Athena for ad-hoc querying on structured and unstructured data using standard SQL.

Athena is completely serverless, which means there’s no need to manage or set up any infrastructure. With Athena, you do not need complex ETL jobs to prepare your data for analysis. This makes it easy for data engineers or anyone with SQL skills to analyze large datasets in no time.

10. Apache Airflow
With the emergence of multiple cloud tools in a modern data workflow, managing data between different teams and achieving data’s full potential becomes more challenging. Job orchestration and scheduling tools strive to eliminate data silos, streamline workflows, and automate repetitive tasks so that IT departments can move quickly and efficiently. Apache Airflow has been a favorite tool for data engineers for orchestrating and scheduling their data pipelines.

Apache Airflow helps you build modern data pipelines through efficient scheduling of tasks. It offers a rich user interface to easily visualize pipelines running in production, monitor progress, and troubleshoot issues when needed.

Building the Best Data Toolkit
These were just 10 of the top tools. There are tons of other data tools out there, which can make data engineers spoilt for choice. While these tools help data engineers build an efficient data information infrastructure, they also have their own pros and cons. Data engineers must find the best data tools for their companies while managing tools’ drawbacks. Ultimately, the goal is to build a robust stack that systematically handles data and can work for months or years with minimal tweaking.